It was the last night of the year. It had snowed, and it was very cold outside. Now it was nearly dark. In the cold and dark walked a poor little girl. She had no hat. She had no shoes. When she left home, she had shoes. They were very large. They had been her mother's. But she had run across the street to avoid a fast horse. The shoes were so big, they fell off as she ran. 

Another child had found one shoe. He ran off with it. She couldn't find the other. So the little girl walked on with her tiny, naked feet. They were quite red and numb from cold.

The girl had many matches. She sold them for money. She kept most of them in an old apron. She held a bundle of them in her hand so people could see. But nobody had bought any from her the whole day. No one had given her a single cent.

And now she was hungry. She had no money for food. She couldn't stay warm. Her body shook as she walked along. The flakes of snow covered her long, fair hair. It fell in lovely curls around her neck. But she didn't feel pretty.

Right now she felt alone. She passed many houses. Candles shone in all the windows. And the air smelled of roast goose. It was New Year's Eve. People were celebrating. They were all happy, but she was not.

She found a corner made by two houses. She sat down and tried to keep out of the wind. She drew her feet up close to her. But she could not keep them warm. Her whole body grew colder. But she couldn't go home. She had not sold any matches today. She had no money to bring to her family. Her father would be angry. And it was cold at home, too. In her room, the wind whistled. The roof had large cracks. They were stopped with straw and rags. But the cold came in just the same.

Her little hands were almost numb with cold. She had a thought. A match might bring her some comfort. If she only dared take one out of the bundle. She could draw it against the wall. It would light. She could warm her fingers by it. She took one out. She lit it. How it blazed, how it burned! It was a warm, bright flame. It looked like a candle. She held her hands over it. It felt wonderful.

It seemed to the little girl as if she were sitting before a large fire. She stretched out her feet to warm them, too. But the small flame went out. The fire was gone. She had only the remains of the burnt-out match in her hand.

She rubbed another one against the wall. It burned as brightly as the first. The light fell on the wall. She thought she could see into the room beyond. On the table was spread a snow-white tablecloth. And there was a splendid china set. The roast goose was hot. It was stuffed with apples and dried plums. Her mouth watered with hunger.

She reached out for the goose. Her fingers almost touched it. Then, the match went out. Nothing was left but the thick, cold, damp wall.

She lit another match. Now she was sitting under the most beautiful Christmas tree. Thousands of lights were burning on the green branches. Pretty pictures hung on the walls. They looked as lovely as the ones she had seen in the shop windows. The little girl held out her hands towards them. Just then, the match went out. 

But the lights of the Christmas tree rose higher and higher. She saw them now as stars in the sky. One fell down and formed a long trail of fire.

"Oh," said the little girl. "Someone has just died." Her old grandmother had told her the story. When a star falls, a soul goes up to Heaven. She wanted to see more, so she lit another match. In the bright light stood her grandmother. She was the only person who had loved the girl. Her face was kind and full of love.

"Grandmother!" cried the little girl. "Please, take me with you!" But her grandmother started to fade as the match burned out.

"No!" screamed the little girl. "Don't go!" And she rubbed all of her matches against the wall. She wanted to keep her grandmother near her. And the matches gave such a bright light. It was brighter even than at noon. Her grandmother became solid again. She took the little girl on her arm. Both flew up into the light. And there was no cold. There was no hunger. They were both in Heaven. The little girl was so happy.

On the street, people stopped at the corner. There they saw the little girl. She was sitting curled up very tightly. It was still very cold. But the girl's cheeks were rosy. She had a smile on her face. She had a bundle of matches in her hand. They were burnt out. 

"She wanted to warm herself," people said. They looked at her body with pity. But no one had any idea of what she had seen. No one even dreamed of her joy. With her grandmother, she was finally happy. With her grandmother, she celebrated the New Year.
