Managers need a new toolkit to manage at the portfolio level. Some are very new; others may look familiar. But don't be fooled. To create new value with a brand portfolio approach it is necessary to use some of these familiar tools in unfamiliar ways. It is like using a hammer in space - it won't feel or look the same as when you use it on the ground.

Extensions are the simplest, oldest, and most common approach to boosting portfolio returns. The key to using extensions strategically is to recognize that there are two different types of extensions that can be applied to each brand portfolio. For less dense portfolios, extension opportunities exist in the open spaces of the molecule. We call these opportunities interstitial extensions because they fill the gaps between the strategic brands in a portfolio. The second type is the boundary extension. They create new brands on the outer edges of an existing brand molecule.

Positioning requires consumers to learn what a brand portfolio stands for. Repositioning requires they first unlearn what it no longer stands for. Of all the tools, none comes with a higher risk/reward ratio than repositioning. Three components play a role in a repositioning: a new communications campaign, the launch of new products or services that signal the new direction of the portfolio, and alliances with companies or brand portfolios whose positioning lies close to where you want to take your brand portfolio.

Pruning brands in a portfolio should occur periodically, in times of strong and weak performance alike. Managers can also improve the chances of success by using the brand molecule to decide which brands can be cut at minimal risk. Finally, the brands that are cut should be cleanly severed from the portfolio.

Over-brands or umbrellas can provide scale opportunities to subscale portfolios. They make sense when they provide an additional trustmark on branded products in categories where existing brands are weak and when they help launch new products or put them in new geographies. Over-branding works when it ties together portfolios with similar customer bases, distribution channels, and price points.

Co-brands, leveraged well, can help bring a brand to your target, consumers in ways not afforded by the immediate business of your current portfolio. Linking brand portfolios can create bridges to dynamic new growth areas. It can reduce the risk of boundary brand extensions and put unused brand equity to work. Often the risk is more manageable than with other tools.

Amalgamation consists of merging two brand portfolios and eliminating one of more of the existing brand names in the process. It is one of the most powerful tools for managing the brand portfolio. Of all the moves to the brand portfolio, amalgamation is the most difficult to reverse. Therefore, it requires careful planning.

Partitioning is an underutilized tool. Over time brand portfolios grow, and there comes a point when their size and breadth becomes dysfunctional. When that time comes, it's time to partition. Brand portfolio managers are often naturally reluctant to partition, concerned that costs will rise, as scale is lost. Learn a lesson from financially driven positioning, the benefits of focus often outweigh the lost scale.

Scaling is a two-part strategy that can drive real growth for a brand portfolio. First, it allows a brand portfolio to follow its natural market, then it fills the upmarket or downmarket void with another portfolio. To make this work, a new customer base must exist for the moved brand. Also, the upscaled or downscaled brand should be distinctive but complementary to its brethren.

Adapted from The Infinite Asset: Managing Brands to Build New Value by Sam Hill and Chris Lederer, HBS Press. Copyright 2001 Harvard Business School Publishing Corporation. All rights reserved.


